README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# wildlandhydRo <a><img src='man/figures/logo.png' align="right" height="131.5" /></a>

# Intro

The goal of wildlandhydRo is to create wrapper functions around commonly
used packages like [streamstats](https://github.com/markwh/streamstats),
[snotelr](https://github.com/bluegreen-labs/snotelr) and
[dataRetrieval](https://github.com/USGS-R/dataRetrieval) and prepare
them for chunk-based parallelism, data munging and reporting. Basically,
a package for me but worth sharing with others.

## Installation

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("joshualerickson/wildlandhydRo")
```

## Examples

Below are some common examples that I routinely use with the package.

### Parallel

With {wildlandhydRo} it is really easy to get station data in parallel.
The functions use the [{furrr}](https://github.com/DavisVaughan/furrr)
framework and will work by planning a session prior to calling the
function. Below is a quick benchmark between the options; regular (np)
or parallel (para).

``` r
library(wildlandhydRo)
library(microbenchmark)
library(dataRetrieval)

sites <- dataRetrieval::whatNWISsites(stateCd='MT', parameterCd = '00060') %>% 
  filter(nchar(site_no) <= 8)

tm <- microbenchmark(
 'np' = {
   batch_USGSdv(sites = sites[1:50,]$site_no, parallel = FALSE)},
 'para' = {
   future::plan('multisession')
   batch_USGSdv(sites = sites[1:50,]$site_no, parallel = TRUE)},
 times = 10
)

tm

autoplot(tm)
```

<img src="man/figures/para_vs_np.png" width="100%" height="100%" />

You can do this for most functions in the package,
e.g. `batch_*(), wym*(), ym*(), get_Basin()`, etc.

### Annual and Monthly Stats

With the package you can get monthly, annual and monthly-annual
statistics for a snotel or usgs sites. You can provide a previously
create `batch_*()` data.frame or the station id. This creates/mungs the
results of the daily values to generate mean, maximum, median and
standard deviation per water year or per water year per month. It also
includes peaks from dataRetrieval::readNWISpeak(); annual base-flow (tp
= 0.9, window = 5) and Base-flow Index (BFI) (total-flow/base-flow) from
baseflow; annual coefficient of variance (sd of flow/mean of flow); and
normalization methods Flow/drainage area, Flow/(all time mean flow) and
Flow/log(standard deviation). The window for all the methods are annual,
e.g. 1. This leaves it up to the user to explore different windows if
inclined. Monthly stats

``` r
water_year <- wyUSGS(sites = '12304500')
ggplot(water_year, aes(peak_dt, Peak)) + 
  geom_line() +
  labs(title = 'Peak Flow per Water Year', 
       subtitle = paste0(water_year %>% slice(n=1) %>% .$Station))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-4-1.png" width="100%" />

``` r
monthly <- wymUSGS(sites = '12304500')
ggplot(monthly, aes(year_month, coef_var)) +
  geom_line() +
  labs(title = 'Monthly Coefficient of Variance', 
       subtitle = paste0(monthly %>% slice(n=1) %>% .$Station))
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-4-2.png" width="100%" />

### Get Percentiles for Reporting

You can also just generate percentiles for daily values or months.

-   Daily

``` r
yaak_dv <- batch_USGSdv(sites = '12304500')

usgs_rep <- reportUSGSdv(procDV = yaak_dv, days = 60)

plot_reportUSGS(usgs_rep)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-5-1.png" width="100%" />

-   Monthly

``` r
usgs_rep_month <- reportUSGSmv(procDV = yaak_dv)

plot_reportUSGS(usgs_rep_month %>% filter(year_nu >2020), time = 'month')
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-6-1.png" width="100%" />

### Get a Drain Point

Sometimes you just want to get the drainage area above a point and then
do some other things. With `get_Basin()` function you just have to
provide a sf point and it will return the basin. If you want zonal stats
associated with that drainage area then just use `get_BasinStats()`.

-   Basin

``` r
pt <- tibble(lon = -114.36, lat = 48.92)
pt <- sf::st_as_sf(pt, coords = c('lon', 'lat'))

basin <- get_Basin(pt)

ggplot() + geom_sf(data = basin)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-7-1.png" width="100%" />

-   Basin Stats

``` r
basin_stats <- get_BasinStats(basin)

basin_stats %>% sf::st_drop_geometry() %>% 
  pivot_longer(cols = c('TOT_PET', 'TOT_BFI', 'TOT_TWI')) %>% 
  select(name, value, comid) %>% 
  right_join(basin_stats, by ='comid') %>% sf::st_as_sf() %>% 
  ggplot() + 
  geom_sf(aes(fill = value)) +
    facet_wrap(~name, nrow = 3) + theme_void()
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-8-1.png" width="100%" />

Commit message:

added info from GH issue #1 to readme

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# wildlandhydRo <a><img src='man/figures/logo.png' align="right" height="131.5" /></a>

# Intro

The goal of wildlandhydRo is to create wrapper functions around commonly
used packages like [streamstats](https://github.com/markwh/streamstats),
[snotelr](https://github.com/bluegreen-labs/snotelr) and
[dataRetrieval](https://github.com/USGS-R/dataRetrieval) and prepare
them for chunk-based parallelism, data munging and reporting. Basically,
a package for me but worth sharing with others.

## Installation

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
#due to GH issue #1
install.packages("lmomRFA")
install.packages("lfstat", repos="http://R-Forge.R-project.org")

#now install
install.packages('devtools')
devtools::install_github("joshualerickson/wildlandhydRo")
```

## Examples

Below are some common examples that I routinely use with the package.

### Parallel

With {wildlandhydRo} it is really easy to get station data in parallel.
The functions use the [{furrr}](https://github.com/DavisVaughan/furrr)
framework and will work by planning a session prior to calling the
function. Below is a quick benchmark between the options; regular (np)
or parallel (para).

``` r
library(wildlandhydRo)
library(microbenchmark)
library(dataRetrieval)

sites <- dataRetrieval::whatNWISsites(stateCd='MT', parameterCd = '00060') %>% 
  filter(nchar(site_no) <= 8)

tm <- microbenchmark(
 'np' = {
   batch_USGSdv(sites = sites[1:50,]$site_no, parallel = FALSE)},
 'para' = {
   future::plan('multisession')
   batch_USGSdv(sites = sites[1:50,]$site_no, parallel = TRUE)},
 times = 10
)

tm

autoplot(tm)
```

<img src="man/figures/para_vs_np.png" width="100%" height="100%" />

You can do this for most functions in the package,
e.g. `batch_*(), wym*(), ym*(), get_Basin()`, etc.

### Annual and Monthly Stats

With the package you can get monthly, annual and monthly-annual
statistics for a snotel or usgs sites. You can provide a previously
create `batch_*()` data.frame or the station id. This creates/mungs the
results of the daily values to generate mean, maximum, median and
standard deviation per water year or per water year per month. It also
includes peaks from dataRetrieval::readNWISpeak(); annual base-flow (tp
= 0.9, window = 5) and Base-flow Index (BFI) (total-flow/base-flow) from
baseflow; annual coefficient of variance (sd of flow/mean of flow); and
normalization methods Flow/drainage area, Flow/(all time mean flow) and
Flow/log(standard deviation). The window for all the methods are annual,
e.g. 1. This leaves it up to the user to explore different windows if
inclined. Monthly stats

``` r
water_year <- wyUSGS(sites = '12304500')
ggplot(water_year, aes(peak_dt, Peak)) + 
  geom_line() +
  labs(title = 'Peak Flow per Water Year', 
       subtitle = paste0(water_year %>% slice(n=1) %>% .$Station))
#> Error : The fig.showtext code chunk option must be TRUE
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-5-1.png" width="100%" />

``` r
monthly <- wymUSGS(sites = '12304500')
ggplot(monthly, aes(year_month, coef_var)) +
  geom_line() +
  labs(title = 'Monthly Coefficient of Variance', 
       subtitle = paste0(monthly %>% slice(n=1) %>% .$Station))
#> Error : The fig.showtext code chunk option must be TRUE
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-5-2.png" width="100%" />

### Get Percentiles for Reporting

You can also just generate percentiles for daily values or months.

-   Daily

``` r
yaak_dv <- batch_USGSdv(sites = '12304500')

usgs_rep <- reportUSGSdv(procDV = yaak_dv, days = 60)

plot_reportUSGS(usgs_rep)
#> Error : The fig.showtext code chunk option must be TRUE
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-6-1.png" width="100%" />

-   Monthly

``` r
usgs_rep_month <- reportUSGSmv(procDV = yaak_dv)

plot_reportUSGS(usgs_rep_month %>% filter(year_nu >2020), time = 'month')
#> Error : The fig.showtext code chunk option must be TRUE
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-7-1.png" width="100%" />

### Get a Drain Point

Sometimes you just want to get the drainage area above a point and then
do some other things. With `get_Basin()` function you just have to
provide a sf point and it will return the basin. If you want zonal stats
associated with that drainage area then just use `get_BasinStats()`.

-   Basin

``` r
pt <- tibble(lon = -114.36, lat = 48.92)
pt <- sf::st_as_sf(pt, coords = c('lon', 'lat'))

basin <- get_Basin(pt)

ggplot() + geom_sf(data = basin)
#> Error : The fig.showtext code chunk option must be TRUE
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-8-1.png" width="100%" />

-   Basin Stats

``` r
basin_stats <- get_BasinStats(basin)

basin_stats %>% sf::st_drop_geometry() %>% 
  pivot_longer(cols = c('TOT_PET', 'TOT_BFI', 'TOT_TWI')) %>% 
  select(name, value, comid) %>% 
  right_join(basin_stats, by ='comid') %>% sf::st_as_sf() %>% 
  ggplot() + 
  geom_sf(aes(fill = value)) +
    facet_wrap(~name, nrow = 3) + theme_void()
#> Error : The fig.showtext code chunk option must be TRUE
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-9-1.png" width="100%" />
